I’m really digging the 3D. The thing that I like about it, and what I’m finding is when I watch it in the way that John Mathieson, the lighting and camera man, is working is 3D…Often times when we think of 3D we think of things coming out of the screen, but actually, you’ve got this zero, this negative space, what they call the negative space, which is the scene, what’s being filmed in the positive space of the audience. As you can have things come out, you can have all of this depth. With this “traditional classicism,” you get this scene and there’s such a grand story, like those sets. Now you’re looking and you can feel depth and go inside that story. It’s like walking on to the stage while actors perform, in a way. I really liked how they’re using the immersive potentials of 3D. It’s beautiful.

They’re taking risks. There’s grandeur and there’s some real grittiness with the Dejima sequence. So there’s a lot of different looks: locations, the outdoors, the temples, where people live. I get taken to this place called Dutch Island, which has its own thing. So that aspect’s been really great to be a part of that.

Action-wise, late last year I started picking up katana and we had some training. My co-star, Hiroyuki Sanada is pretty fantastic with a sword. Films like The Twilight Samurai, Last Samurai. I kinda grew up with Sonny Chiba. I remember we were doing a camera test and I was like, “So, Hiro, how many samurai films have you done?” And he said, “Twenty.” And I said, “Okkkkay.” Later I asked him, “How many have you done, again?” and he went, “Mmm, 30.”

And one day in Los Angeles in training, he came over because he wanted to speak about the work. He warms up a little bit and I’m taking lessons from this gentleman, Tsuyoshi [Abe] and so he says to Tsuyoshi, “Do overhead strike.” And Sanada goes and there’s the blade against his Adam’s apple. I go, “Okay…there’s the bar.” I haven’t reached it.

But he’s so fantastic. What’s great about working with someone who’s so experienced is he’s very generous with help. “Look here, put your balance here, move like this, checking form.” He’s great with all of the cast and everyone, he’s making sure everything’s right. How do you wear your swords? He’s like his character [Kuranosuke] Oishi. He’s this guy who’s looking out for everybody. In the way his character is looking out for Ako, he’s looking out for the cast, he’s looking out for the production.

We’ve had one fight together and they did these shots on Phantom, which is this high-speed digital camera. I’m kind of like this caveman. In super slow-motion, we have this sequence. Every line is so beautiful and I’m like yelling so hopefully that’ll be a nice contrast. And they’re trying to have traditional two-handed sword. Hiroyuki’s really paying attention to that. And then I’ve got this other past, I’ve got other training where I go into one-hand stuff.